migration/migration-validators.md, before:

# PoS Migration Guide for Validators

This guide is for users interested in using Nimiq’s Migration Tools to register their validator and transition from Nimiq PoW to PoS. For post-migration validator registration, refer to the [becoming a validator](/build/set-up-your-own-node/becoming-a-validator.md) documentation. For a complete understanding of the migration technicalities, refer to [this document](migration-technical-details).

## Validator Registration Tool

The Validator Registration tool facilitates the pre-registration process for validators, so they are included in the PoS genesis block. Validators pre-register within the PoW chain. The Validator Registration tool operates in two distinct modes:

- Keys and corresponding address generation
- Validator registration via transactions

### Prerequisites

1. Make sure you have [Node.js](https://nodejs.org) >= v18.20.4 installed.
2. Clone the [Nimiq Validator Registration Tool repository](https://github.com/nimiq/validator-registration-tool).
3. Install Yarn with the command `npm install -g yarn`.
4. Install all the dependencies by executing `yarn` inside the repository.

### Step 1: Generate validator keys

Execute the tool without parameters to generate a validator address, signing key, and voting key:

```shell
node validator-registration.js
```

The tool generates fresh keys and stores them into the `validator-keys.json` file in your current directory. The following screenshot demonstrates an example output of the script:

<img class="object-contain max-h-[max(80vh,220px)]" src="/assets/images/migration/migration.png" alt="Validator example keys" />

<Callout type='tip'>

Save the private keys securely, especially the validator private key! **There is no recovery mechanism for lost private keys**. Once lost, access to your validator and related NIM may be permanently lost.

</Callout>

#### Using your own keys

You can of course also generate your validator, signing and/or voting keys yourself through other methods. Just replace the address and keys in the `validator-keys.json` file with the ones you have and continue with the next step.

### Step 2: Fund your validator address

To start the validator registration process, fund the validator address you just generated to cover the nominal transaction fees of 1 Luna each (you need at least 6 Lunas = 0.00006 NIM) associated with the validator registration process. Additionally, you will need to pay the readiness transaction, so you need to fund your address with **10 Lunas for the registration and activation transactions**. You can use any wallet to send Lunas to this address.

<Callout type='info'>

You will need funds to pay for the validator registration transactions and for the deposit for your validator. If you don't have funds for these transactions, please fund your address!

</Callout>

### Step 3: Run the validator registration tool

To register your validator and the corresponding keys on the PoW Mainnet, you must specify the arguments as follows:

```shell
node validator-registration.js --validator validator-keys.json --network main
```

The tool will connect to the Nimiq PoW Mainnet chain. Upon consensus, the tool creates and signs the validator registration transactions and sends them to the network, effectively registering your validator. Note that these transactions are a bundle of 6, and each one has a nominal fee of 1 Luna. Please ensure you have funded your validator address &mdash; as instructed in the previous step &mdash; as the transaction fees are paid from this address.

For detailed guidance through the scripts and their options, run `node validator-registration.js --help`. This will print out the usage instructions.

### Step 4: Deposit payment and commit

The final step involves committing to the registration and paying the validator's deposit of 100 000 NIM. This transaction can be sent from any address. Irrespective of the address you send the deposit from, **you must include your validator address** in the transaction’s “public message” field so your deposit can later be matched to your validator. Please include your validator address in human-readable format (NQ...).

To send the transaction manually via the Nimiq Wallet, you need the following data:

|                       |                                                                      |
| --------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Recipient Address** | `NQ07 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000`                       |
| **Value**             | `100000` NIM or more                                                 |
| **Public Message**    | Your validator address in human-readable format (starting with `NQ`) |

<Callout type='warning'>

Please note that any value below 100 000 NIM will result in permanent loss. Any amount above 100 000 NIM will be assigned as stake as long as the difference is greater than the minimum stake (100 NIM); otherwise, the excess will be burned.

</Callout>

## Validator Activation Tool

The Activation Tool facilitates the transition from the PoW chain to the PoS chain. We recommend running the activation tool before its window begins to ensure sufficient time for migrating the history, as this process can be time-consuming.

### Prerequisites

- Access to a PoW chain client with RPC access enabled.
  - Follow instructions in [the core-js repository](https://github.com/nimiq/core-js) to start your client and have your client synchronized against the main network.
  - Follow the instructions in [this sample guide](https://github.com/nimiq/core-js/blob/master/clients/nodejs/sample.conf) to enable RPC in your POW client.
- Clone and compile the [PoS blockchain](https://github.com/nimiq/core-rs-albatross?tab=readme-ov-file#installation) repository and follow the instructions.

### Step 1:  Add your Validator Data into the Configuration File

Once you have your client setup, you can either:

- Go to the file `$HOME/.nimiq/client.toml`, which includes a dedicated validator section at the end, and paste your validator data into this section.
- Refer to [this guide](/build/set-up-your-own-node/becoming-a-validator.md#configuration).

Ensure that you set your `sync_mode` as `full` or `history` in the consensus part of the configuration file. Only full or history nodes are eligible to be validators.

### Step 2:  Run the Activation Tool

The Activation tool establishes a connection with the PoW chain via RPC, extracting data from your configuration file and crosschecking it with the information in the JSON file within the PoW chain.

To execute the tool successfully, you need to ensure that you are fully synced and in consensus **within the PoW chain**. This requires starting the PoW client with an RPC server enabled on your imported validator address (this might take a while). As in [this example](https://github.com/nimiq/core-js/blob/master/clients/nodejs/sample.conf#L163), you can do it in your configuration file by adding your address and key pair.

Alternatively, you can start the RPC server by cloning the [Nimiq CoreJS repository](https://github.com/nimiq/core-js?tab=readme-ov-file#quickstart) then following the quickstart instructions and finally running the following command:

```shell
node clients/nodejs/index.js --dumb --network=main --rpc=8648 --wallet-seed=private_keypublic_key
```

Note that `private_keypublic_key` is the concatenation of your private key and public key in that order.

Before executing the activation tool, make sure you run ```cargo build --release``` within the PoS repository to compile the code.

Once you have consensus on the PoW chain, proceed to execute the migration tool by running the following command **in the PoS chain client** directory, including the path to the configuration file containing your validator data and specifying the RPC server to be used:

```shell
cargo run --release --bin nimiq-pow-migration --url "url-according-your-configuration" --config client.toml
```

Where `url-according-your-configuration` is the PoW client RPC url. For example: `http://172.0.0.1:8648`.

When the tool is launched, it will monitor the network for at least 80% readiness. Once this threshold is reached, the transition block marks the beginning of the PoS chain, and any transactions sent after the transition block are not considered part of the PoS chain. Learn more about this [here](/migration/migration-technical-details.md).

Commit message:

Be more explicit on creating the `.nimiq` folder in advance and how to acquire the content of the `client.toml`

migration/migration-validators.md, after:

# PoS Migration Guide for Validators

This guide is for users interested in using Nimiq’s Migration Tools to register their validator and transition from Nimiq PoW to PoS. For post-migration validator registration, refer to the [becoming a validator](/build/set-up-your-own-node/becoming-a-validator.md) documentation. For a complete understanding of the migration technicalities, refer to [this document](migration-technical-details).

## Validator Registration Tool

The Validator Registration tool facilitates the pre-registration process for validators, so they are included in the PoS genesis block. Validators pre-register within the PoW chain. The Validator Registration tool operates in two distinct modes:

- Keys and corresponding address generation
- Validator registration via transactions

### Prerequisites

1. Make sure you have [Node.js](https://nodejs.org) >= v18.20.4 installed.
2. Clone the [Nimiq Validator Registration Tool repository](https://github.com/nimiq/validator-registration-tool).
3. Install Yarn with the command `npm install -g yarn`.
4. Install all the dependencies by executing `yarn` inside the repository.

### Step 1: Generate validator keys

Execute the tool without parameters to generate a validator address, signing key, and voting key:

```shell
node validator-registration.js
```

The tool generates fresh keys and stores them into the `validator-keys.json` file in your current directory. The following screenshot demonstrates an example output of the script:

<img class="object-contain max-h-[max(80vh,220px)]" src="/assets/images/migration/migration.png" alt="Validator example keys" />

<Callout type='tip'>

Save the private keys securely, especially the validator private key! **There is no recovery mechanism for lost private keys**. Once lost, access to your validator and related NIM may be permanently lost.

</Callout>

#### Using your own keys

You can of course also generate your validator, signing and/or voting keys yourself through other methods. Just replace the address and keys in the `validator-keys.json` file with the ones you have and continue with the next step.

### Step 2: Fund your validator address

To start the validator registration process, fund the validator address you just generated to cover the nominal transaction fees of 1 Luna each (you need at least 6 Lunas = 0.00006 NIM) associated with the validator registration process. Additionally, you will need to pay the readiness transaction, so you need to fund your address with **10 Lunas for the registration and activation transactions**. You can use any wallet to send Lunas to this address.

<Callout type='info'>

You will need funds to pay for the validator registration transactions and for the deposit for your validator. If you don't have funds for these transactions, please fund your address!

</Callout>

### Step 3: Run the validator registration tool

To register your validator and the corresponding keys on the PoW Mainnet, you must specify the arguments as follows:

```shell
node validator-registration.js --validator validator-keys.json --network main
```

The tool will connect to the Nimiq PoW Mainnet chain. Upon consensus, the tool creates and signs the validator registration transactions and sends them to the network, effectively registering your validator. Note that these transactions are a bundle of 6, and each one has a nominal fee of 1 Luna. Please ensure you have funded your validator address &mdash; as instructed in the previous step &mdash; as the transaction fees are paid from this address.

For detailed guidance through the scripts and their options, run `node validator-registration.js --help`. This will print out the usage instructions.

### Step 4: Deposit payment and commit

The final step involves committing to the registration and paying the validator's deposit of 100 000 NIM. This transaction can be sent from any address. Irrespective of the address you send the deposit from, **you must include your validator address** in the transaction’s “public message” field so your deposit can later be matched to your validator. Please include your validator address in human-readable format (NQ...).

To send the transaction manually via the Nimiq Wallet, you need the following data:

|                       |                                                                      |
| --------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Recipient Address** | `NQ07 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000`                       |
| **Value**             | `100000` NIM or more                                                 |
| **Public Message**    | Your validator address in human-readable format (starting with `NQ`) |

<Callout type='warning'>

Please note that any value below 100 000 NIM will result in permanent loss. Any amount above 100 000 NIM will be assigned as stake as long as the difference is greater than the minimum stake (100 NIM); otherwise, the excess will be burned.

</Callout>

## Validator Activation Tool

The Activation Tool facilitates the transition from the PoW chain to the PoS chain. We recommend running the activation tool before its window begins to ensure sufficient time for migrating the history, as this process can be time-consuming.

### Prerequisites

- Access to a PoW chain client with RPC access enabled.
  - Follow instructions in [the core-js repository](https://github.com/nimiq/core-js) to start your client and have your client synchronized against the main network.
  - Follow the instructions in [this sample guide](https://github.com/nimiq/core-js/blob/master/clients/nodejs/sample.conf) to enable RPC in your POW client.
- Clone and compile the [PoS blockchain](https://github.com/nimiq/core-rs-albatross?tab=readme-ov-file#installation) repository and follow the instructions.

### Step 1:  Add your Validator Data into the Configuration File

Once you have your client setup, you can either:

- Create the `$HOME/.nimiq` folder if it doesn't exist already, and inside create a `client.toml` file based on this [example](https://github.com/nimiq/core-rs-albatross/blob/albatross/lib/src/config/config_file/client.example.toml).
At the end of this file, the client configuration includes a dedicated validator section. You can fill in your validator data into this section.
- Refer to [this guide](/build/set-up-your-own-node/becoming-a-validator.md#configuration).

Ensure that you set your `sync_mode` as `full` or `history` in the consensus part of the configuration file. Only full or history nodes are eligible to be validators.

### Step 2:  Run the Activation Tool

The Activation tool establishes a connection with the PoW chain via RPC, extracting data from your configuration file and crosschecking it with the information in the JSON file within the PoW chain.

To execute the tool successfully, you need to ensure that you are fully synced and in consensus **within the PoW chain**. This requires starting the PoW client with an RPC server enabled on your imported validator address (this might take a while). As in [this example](https://github.com/nimiq/core-js/blob/master/clients/nodejs/sample.conf#L163), you can do it in your configuration file by adding your address and key pair.

Alternatively, you can start the RPC server by cloning the [Nimiq CoreJS repository](https://github.com/nimiq/core-js?tab=readme-ov-file#quickstart) then following the quickstart instructions and finally running the following command:

```shell
node clients/nodejs/index.js --dumb --network=main --rpc=8648 --wallet-seed=private_keypublic_key
```

Note that `private_keypublic_key` is the concatenation of your private key and public key in that order.

Before executing the activation tool, make sure you run ```cargo build --release``` within the PoS repository to compile the code.

Once you have consensus on the PoW chain, proceed to execute the migration tool by running the following command **in the PoS chain client** directory, including the path to the configuration file containing your validator data and specifying the RPC server to be used:

```shell
cargo run --release --bin nimiq-pow-migration --url "url-according-your-configuration" --config client.toml
```

Where `url-according-your-configuration` is the PoW client RPC url. For example: `http://172.0.0.1:8648`.

When the tool is launched, it will monitor the network for at least 80% readiness. Once this threshold is reached, the transition block marks the beginning of the PoS chain, and any transactions sent after the transition block are not considered part of the PoS chain. Learn more about this [here](/migration/migration-technical-details.md).
